Our next concept seems very simple and it is,
but it holds the potential to be
a tremendous time-saver and can become an excellent first place
to look for answers to questions about changes
that you observe in your Google Analytics Data.
Proper and consistent use of the annotations function,
which allows you to leave notes that are date stamped in
Google analytics can provide a historical record of occurrences, events, initiatives,
and changes both internal and external, intentional,
and accidental that could impact how your data looks and is reflected in your reports.
We know that there's a timeline on the audience overview.
So, let's quickly go there.
So, here's our timeline graph.
Here, you can see that some annotations exist because
of these little word bubbles that exist on the timeline.
I wonder what they say.
Well we're going to find out.
But first we want to talk about and list for you
some potential instances when leaving annotations might be best warranted.
You and your team can use annotations to help explain changes that occur in your data.
So, anything that stands to cause a spike or a drop is an excellent candidate.
These include, new marketing campaigns or instances of ongoing campaigns such as email,
design and development changes on your site, new products,
mass media marketing, and changes to
your actual GA implementation such as creating filters or goals.
Now, those are some examples of things that you want to cause a spike.
But what about some things that might cause your data to dip for a period of time?
Minutes can make a difference in some instances,
but what about hours or days?
If any of the following things occur,
we recommend you go into Google Analytics and create an annotation to record it.
You'll be glad you did.
If you experience server issues from short-term to a complete website outage altogether,
go ahead and get that recorded.
Anything that occurs that causes user sentiment about your brand can drop or spike.
For example a poor or excellent earnings report for a big company,
or negative or positive PR incident that goes viral.
These are things that can cause changes that you'll want to be able to put
your fingertips on when you notice the dips are spikes in your data.
We're also aware of some organizations that make
annotations around production shutdowns that they have;
known seasonality surrounding their products or
services and even holidays that impact website traffic.
It's simple notes like these that can often be
especially overlooked when looking at data dips.
Because the first thing that we tend to do when we see a data dip,
is go to the worst and unforeseen kinds of explanations.
This can save you from heading down that rabbit hole.
Using annotations can be a hard habit to get into,
because you're certain in the moment that you'll just
remember the causes for these spikes and these dips.
But given the pace of our lives and this industry,
is just not humanly possible for most people to do that.
Our advice is always to record these occurrences as
annotations where you can always find reference and context exactly where you need it,
along the date and the Google Analytics interface,
no matter how far in the future you might need it.